[intro music]
Hello and welcome
to another EarSketch video.
My name is Brandon, and I'm
a member of the EarSketch team.
Today we're going to cover
return statements.
By the end of this video you'll
know what a return statement is,
how to use it,
and why it's useful.
Before we get
to return statements,
let's quickly review
the purpose of a function.
A function gives us a way
to code a specific task,
a routine, if you will.
The code within a function
is packaged up all neatly
so we can use it without having
to worry about what's inside.
We call this “abstraction.”
The function can simply
be called to perform its task.
Up until this point,
our function calls have worked
like this:
We give our function
some arguments, the input,
and then the code
within the function body
executes whatever it may be.
All the action is happening
within the function,
and all the information is
contained within the function.
But functions also have the
ability to output information.
And this is achieved
by using a return statement.
Return statements allow us
to output information
generated within a function
so it can be used outside of the
function later on in our script.
For example,
if we have a function
that generates a number,
like maybe a measure number,
we can output it or return it
so we can use it in another
calculation or expression.
The information is no longer
just contained
within the function body.
Let's walk through an example
in EarSketch
to look at how return statements
work in more detail.
OK, I'm going to go ahead
and create a new script.
And we’re provided
the standard starting items.
I’m going to slow down
my tempo just a bit.
For this example, we're going
to be using makeBeat.
So I'm going to define
two beatStrings
that I came up with earlier.
Now I'm going to define a custom
function called “createBeat.”
We're going to use this function
with the return statement
in order to chain two
beats together, back to back.
Its parameters are going to be
the measure we want to start at,
the sound clip we want to use,
and, of course, the beatString.
In the body,
I'm going to define a variable
that sets the ending measure
of our beat.
This could be any length,
but I'm going to set it up
so our beat
is three measures long.
We’ll need to play
or makeBeat call within a loop
in order to place a beat
over multiple measures,
so let's go ahead and do that.
We'll say “from measure in range
from start measure
to end measure.”
And this loop will iterate
by a single measure.
We'll place our makeBeat call
within the loop
using the sound clip
we pass into the function
putting it on track 1,
starting at the loop counter
measure and our beatString.
Now it turns out the endMeasure
is kind of a special variable
in this case.
If we want a chain
two beats together,
we need to know
where the first beat should end
and where the second
should start.
This is a perfect opportunity
to return endMeasure
so it can be used
outside the function.
We'll come back to what's
going on here in a second.
In order for our function
to execute, we need to call it.
And to get two beats,
we'll need to call it twice.
Let's start with
the first function call.
We'll pass in the starting
measure of 1,
A hip hop clip,
and our first beatString.
Let's walk through
exactly what's happening
within our function
to see what it outputs.
With startMeasure equal to 1,
endMeasure will equal 4.
Our for loop will execute
a series of makeBeat calls,
and then we output the value
in endMeasure
using a return statement.
What the return statement
is saying here is pass the value
in endMeasure back
to whatever called me.
In this case, the value
in endMeasure is the number 4
and our function call,
right here,
is what we are passing
the number back to.
So you can think of this
entire call being replaced
with the number 4.
But we can't just have a value
hanging out
in the middle of our script.
So we should assign it
to a variable so it can be used.
We essentially just assign
the number 4
to the newStart variable.
This gives us the ability
to chain
a second beat onto our first.
Now, we can take newStart
and pass it in
as the starting measure
of a second createBeat
function call.
And, of course, this function
returns as ending measure
as well but,
since we don't need to use it,
we can leave
this function call as is.
Let's press Run to hear
what we've created.
[syncopated kick drum,
bass drop]
There's a couple of other things
I want to point out
about return statements.
As you maybe guessed,
a function does not need
a return statement.
It's optional.
Functions without
a return statement
simply do not return
or output a value.
So when deciding whether to use
a return statement
in your functions,
ask yourself,
“Is there any information
generated inside this function
that I could use later on?”
If you don't need to use
any of that information
outside the function,
then you probably don't need
a return statement.
You should also know
that if you choose
to use a return statement,
your function will end
once the return statement
is encountered.
It's a signal to stop.
So if you have any code
after the return statement
in your function body,
it will be ignored.
And with that, we've come
to the end of another video.
Happy programming
and thanks for watching!
[syncopated kick drum]